[Docs] Getting started with web analytics (#10053)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/docs/web-analytics/getting-started.mdx

---
title: Getting started with web analytics
sidebar: Docs
showTitle: true
---

> To get started with [web analytics](/web-analytics), [install PostHog](/docs/getting-started/install) and you'll automatically collect data based on traffic to your app or website.
> 
> Web analytics provides you with a simple [dashboard](/docs/web-analytics/dashboard). If you're new to marketing and analytics, this is a gentle introduction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Web analytics provides you with a simple dashboard of common website and app metrics. 

This page covers the basic functionality and some common user cases, such as finding when users are most active.
```

## Where do I start?

> The best way to get started is to open your web analytics [dashboard](https://app.posthog.com/web) and take a look at the data, which is all based on how people interact with your app or website. Then, we can dive into what the data means and how it can help you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The best way to get started is to open your [web analytics dashboard](https://app.posthog.com/web) and take a look at the data, which is all based on how people interact with your app or website.
```

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/web_analytics_top_light_mode_2024_10_be53cf5325.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/web_analytics_top_dark_mode_2024_10_6aa6dc9aeb.png"
  alt="Web analytics dashboard"
  classes="rounded"
/>

At a glance, the dashboard has sections for all of the following data:

- **Visitors and pageviews:** How many people are coming to your website? How many pages do they visit?
- **Sessions and session duration:** How often do people visit? How long do they stay?
- **Paths:** What pages are they visiting?
- **Channels, referrers, and UTM parameters:** Where did they come from?
- **Demographic information:** What devices, browsers, and operating systems are they using? Where are they located?
- **Goals:** Are users performing the actions you want them to?

We'll dive into all these below.

## How do I use web analytics?

### Visitors, pageviews, and sessions

> The first thing you'll see at the top of the web analytics dashboard is a graph of visitor data, which we can use to answer questions like these:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first thing you'll see at the top of the web analytics dashboard is a graph of visitor data, which we can use to answer questions like:
```

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/paths_docs_2924a8d630.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/paths_docs_dark_1887fbb2c7.png"
  alt="Most popular paths"
  classes="rounded"
/>

### Channels, referrers, and UTM sources

The web analytics dashboard also enables you to find out where traffic is coming from.

#### Channels

Channels distinguish between different sources that are bringing traffic to your website. They're also sometimes called marketing channels or acquisition channels. Here are some examples:

- **Search:** visitors from a search engine like Google (you can also distinguish between traffic from organic search results and paid ads)
- **Social:** visitors from social media site
- **Referrals:** visitors that clicked a referral link (more on this below)
- **Direct:** visitors that went directly to your website (by typing the URL or clicking a bookmark for example)

> This is just a small sample of the available channels to give you an idea of how to get started. There's a full list of available [channel types](/docs/data/channel-type), and features for defining your own [custom channels](/docs/web-analytics/dashboard#custom-channel-type) as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is just a small sample of the available channels to give you an idea of how to get started. There's a full list of available [channel types](/docs/data/channel-type), and you can define your own [custom channels](/docs/web-analytics/dashboard#custom-channel-type) as well.
```

---
title: Getting started with web analytics
sidebar: Docs
showTitle: true
---

> It's easy to get up and running with [web analytics](/web-analytics). All you need to do is [install PostHog](/docs/getting-started/install) and you'll automatically start collecting data based on traffic to your app or website.

Reviewer 2: I dont think we need this, given that the previous page is "installation", so lets assume they've already installed posthog

Reviewer 2: (ignore this comment if you rewrite as a tutorial)

> Web analytics provides you with a simple [dashboard](/docs/web-analytics/dashboard), but it can be overwhelming if you don't have a technical background or experience with marketing concepts.

Reviewer 2: Im not sure we should frame it as "`if you don't have a technical background`, since in general we assume that our users are technical. My concern is that an engineer would read this line and think this doc is not for them. So maybe we should just have "if you're new to marketing/web analytics bit"

Author: Fair point. I think I picked up this article from the mega issue and it literally said "(for non-technical people)", but you're right if we're writing with the assumption that all our users/readers are technical. I went ahead and tweaked the wording and removed the "overwhelming" bit.

This post provides a gentle guide to web analytics by introducing the following:

- **💡 Concepts:** explanations for common analytics terms
- **🛠️ Features:** tools and affordances web analytics provides

> - **📋 Use cases:** practical examples of how to use web analytics

Reviewer 2: A few notes:
- Docs should be straight to the point, so we should make them as concise as possible and remove all fluff
- I dont think this is a "post". Its a docs page, so you could say "this doc". Post is more like blog post/tutorial

Reviewer: +1 again. In hindsight, I think this setup just adds more complexity.

Author: I went ahead and removed the bullet points and the reference to this doc as a "post".

## Where do I start?

The best way to get started is to open your web analytics [dashboard](https://app.posthog.com/web) and take a look at the data, which is all based on how people interact with your app or website. Then, we can dive into what the data means and how it can help you.

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/web_analytics_top_light_mode_2024_10_be53cf5325.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/web_analytics_top_dark_mode_2024_10_6aa6dc9aeb.png"
  alt="Web analytics dashboard"
  classes="rounded"
/>

At a glance, the dashboard has sections for all of the following data:

- **Visitors, pageviews, and sessions:** How many people are coming to your website? How many pages do they visit? How long do they stay?
- **Paths:** Which pages are they going to?
- **Channels, referrers, and UTM parameters:** Where did they come from?
- **Demographic information:** What devices, browsers, and operating systems are they using? Where are they located?

> - **Goals:** Are users performing the actions you want them to?

Reviewer: Split sessions into its own bullet here

We'll dive into all these below.

## How do I use web analytics?

### Visitors, pageviews, and sessions

The first thing you'll see at the top of the web analytics dashboard is a graph of visitor data, which we can use to answer questions like these:

- How many people are currently online _right now_?
- How many people visited in the last week, month, or custom time period?
- Is the number of visitors going up or down over a given time period?

> **💡 Concept:** What is the distinction between a visitor and a session?
> - A [**session**](/docs/data/sessions) is a set of events for a single visit to your website. Sessions have a beginning, a duration, and an end.
> - A **visitor** represents a single person visiting your site.
>
> In other words, a single visitor will have many sessions as they return to your website. And each session will likely have many pageviews as they move from page to page.

> The first important feature to get familiar with is working with time intervals. You can adjust all the data on your web analytics dashboard to be scoped to the last 24 hours, the last 7 days, the year-to-date, or any other custom time range. In the screenshot below, we can see the last 30 days of traffic. You can also hover over the graph to see the value for the current period compared with the previous period.

Reviewer: To Lior's point around docs, I've just tweaked this to be more direct.

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/time_intervals_wide_2ce241b1c4.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/time_intervals_wide_dark_2256d417c6.png"
  alt="Time interval selection"
  classes="rounded"
/>

> #### 📋 Use case: Finding when users are most active

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Use case: Finding when users are most active
```

If you have a weekly newsletter, you may want to send it to your readers at a time they're likely to be active and not miss it. PostHog has a newsletter called [_Product for Engineers_](https://newsletter.posthog.com), and we can use these graphs to make an educated guess about when users are most active.

- Filtering by the "Last 30 days" and grouping by day reveals that Tuesdays and Wednesdays are the most active weekdays for our users, whereas Saturdays are the days with the least activity.
- Filtering by the "Last 7 days" and grouping by hour shows the ideal time to send is between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. EST.

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/last_7_days_light_8ca2fe6345.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/last_7_days_dark_d9273fa42c.png"
  alt="Last 7 days by hour"
  classes="rounded"

> />

Reviewer: Could we try detail expands for these again? I think this might work better than your original boxout approach, though they're fine as they are now.

### Paths

Paths show you all the specific pages accessed in your app or website, which can help answer questions like the following:

- What content is popular and effective?
- What is the last page people visit before leaving?
- What is the bounce rate for a particular page?

> **💡 Concept:** What is the bounce rate? Bounce rate is the percentage of users who leave your page immediately after visiting. In other words, a bounce is when someone lands on a page, but doesn't interact with it and leaves within 10 seconds. For more information, we also have a tutorial available for [how to calculate bounce rate](/tutorials/bounce-rate).

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1711580005/posthog.com/contents/images/docs/web-analytics/dashboard/paths-light.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1711580004/posthog.com/contents/images/docs/web-analytics/dashboard/paths-dark.png"
  alt="Paths"
  classes="rounded"
/>

> One of the most powerful features for web analytics is the ability to filter the data. So far we've been looking at global data for all visitors, but we can also narrow the scope of the data we're looking at. At the top of your dashboard, you can click the **+ Add filter** button and filter based on various event properties. You'll have dozens or even hundreds of data points to use for filtering, but here are a handful of examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can drill down into specific pages and event properties using the **+ Add filter**.

You'll have dozens or even hundreds of data points to use for filtering, but here are a handful of examples:
```

- **Entry path** shows stats for the first page a user saw when they opened your website
- **End path** shows stats for the last page a user visited before their session ended
- **Outbound clicks** show which links that users clicked on to leave your site

#### 📋 Use case: Finding the most popular content

PostHog hosts all of our developer documentation at `/docs`. What if we want to find the most popular docs? We can click the **+ Add filter** button and add a filter where _Path Name_ contains `"/docs/"`. And then we can see the results with the most popular documentation:

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/paths_docs_2924a8d630.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/paths_docs_dark_1887fbb2c7.png"
  alt="Most popular paths"
  classes="rounded"
/>

### Channels, referrers, and UTM sources

The web analytics dashboard also enables you to find out where traffic is coming from.

#### Channels

Channels distinguish between different sources that are bringing traffic to your website. They're also sometimes called marketing channels or acquisition channels. Here are some examples:

> - Search: visitors from a search engine like Google (you can also distinguish between traffic from organic search results and paid ads)
> - Social: visitors from social media site
> - Referrals: visitors that clicked a referral link (more on this below)
> - Direct: visitors that went directly to your website (by typing the URL or clicking a bookmark for example)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Search:** visitors from a search engine like Google (you can also distinguish between traffic from organic search results and paid ads)
- **Social:** visitors from social media site
- **Referrals:** visitors that clicked a referral link (more on this below)
- **Direct:** visitors that went directly to your website (by typing the URL or clicking a bookmark for example)
```

#### Referrers

Referrers provides a list of the domains your visitors are coming from. For example, you'll see how many users came from `google.com`, `youtube.com`, or `ycombinator.com`. If a user visits your website directly without coming from somewhere else, it will show up as `$direct`.

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/referrers_light_9d37babf9a.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/referrers_dark_8d458b5a66.png"
  alt="Referrers"
  classes="rounded"
/>

#### UTM parameters

UTM parameters are another way to get information about where people are coming from. By providing some structured values at the end of our URLs, we can segment visitors into groups.

For example, if you advertise a sale on Google, you can use the URL to indicate the `utm_source` and `utm_campaign`:

`posthog.com?utm_source=google,utm_campaign=summer-sale`

> Web analytics enables you to filter by all the various UTM parameters that are available, and you can learn more about them in our [UTM segmentation](/docs/data/utm-segmentation) doc. We also have a tutorial on [how to track performance marketing](/tutorials/performance-marketing) that is highly relevant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Web analytics enables you to filter by all the various UTM parameters that are available, and you can learn more about them in our [UTM segmentation](/docs/data/utm-segmentation) doc. We also have a tutorial on [how to track performance marketing](/tutorials/performance-marketing) that goes into more detail.
```

> #### 📋 Use case: Tracking visitors from a sponsored video

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Use case: Tracking visitors from a sponsored video
```

`https://posthog.com/fireship`

That URL gets transformed into the following UTM paramaters:

`https://posthog.com/?utm_source=fireship&utm_campaign=fireship`

Then, we can see how many visitors came from that video by using the "UTM source" option on our web analytics dashboard:

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/utm_source_light_21fa9c00fe.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/utm_source_dark_eada0f8178.png"
  alt="UTM sources"
  classes="rounded"
/>

### Demographic information

Based on how users are accessing your website, web analytics also provides additional demographic metrics that can help answer the following:

- What kinds of devices are visitors using? Laptops? Tablets? Phones?
- Which browsers and operating systems are most popular?
- Where are users located geographically? Which countries? Which cities?
- What are the most popular languages for visitors?

### Goals

The goals section of the web analytics dashboard is all about tracking conversion goals.

> > **💡 Concept:** What is a conversion? A conversion is a key event or action you want users to do. If a user converted, it means they not only visited your website, but also performed some key action like signing up or subscribing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A conversion is a key event or action you want users to do. If a user converted, it means they not only visited your website, but also performed some key action like signing up or subscribing.
```

You can click the **Add conversion goal** button at the top of the web analytics dashboard, and check out our detailed guide on how to set up [conversion goals](/docs/web-analytics/conversion-goals).

<ProductScreenshot
  imageLight="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/Clean_Shot_2024_11_04_at_12_29_08_3bba14e7e9.png"
  imageDark="https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/Clean_Shot_2024_11_04_at_12_28_25_689e6c893d.png"
  alt="Conversion goal"
  classes="rounded"
/>

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add a link to the conversion goals docs page here?

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/PostHog/posthog.com/pull/10053/commits/9f3700f8849606c85707b80c9e1ac8a3a9ee6282

> ## Further reading
> 
> This post is meant as a gentle introduction to the big picture concepts for web analytics, but there's a lot more depth available. Check out the web analytics [dashboard](/docs/web-analytics/dashboard) docs for more.
> 
> And while web analytics is good for tracking high-level website metrics, product analytics is good for diving deep into how specific users behave. For more on the distinction between the two, check out our post on [web vs. product analytics](/docs/web-analytics/web-vs-product-analytics).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think we can lose this. This is more an element we're more likely to use in a tutorial than a docs page.
